"Novena in Honour of our Holy Father St. Francis"
from Manual of the Arch-Confraternity of the Cord of St. Francis
Compiled by the Franciscan Fathers of Stratford
Burns & Oates, London, 1878, pp. 61-71
Internet Archive identifier: ManualCordOfSFrancis
Rights statement: Public Domain Mark 1.0

Source footnote (printed at the foot of p. 61, marked with an asterisk in
the original): "Taken from one printed in Rome for the solemn Novena at
Ara-cœli."

EDITORIAL NOTE: This is an OCR-assisted transcription verified against the
scanned page images at archive.org/details/ManualCordOfSFrancis. Obvious
single-character OCR mis-scans (e.g. "Prater" for the ligatured "Prayer",
"OP"/"Hut" for the running headers' "OF"/"But", "w r ere" for "were") have
been silently corrected where the intended word is unambiguous. Two
genuinely uncertain OCR spots are flagged in place with [sic — OCR unclear]
rather than guessed. Original spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are
otherwise preserved as printed, including the closing "Amen. Three Our
Fathers, Hail Marys, and Glory be, &c." formula (abbreviated to "as above"
after the First Day in the original, expanded here in the structured
seed data for readability — see the editorial note in novenaFrancis.ts).

This is a historical novena in honour of St. Francis of Assisi (1182-1226) —
composed by others in his honour, not written by him. It reflects
nineteenth-century Roman Catholic devotional practice, including references
to the Third Order and to Franciscan confraternity customs of its time.

================================================================================

Novena in Honour of our Holy Father St. Francis.

First Day.
Humility of St. Francis.

Precisely in the same degree that St. Francis became great in the eyes of
men, he became little in his own. He considered himself the greatest
sinner in the world, and could never be induced to receive the priesthood.
In order to lower himself in the opinion of those who revered his virtues,
he published his faults, and got his companions to heap injuries and
reproaches upon him; then, after listening to them with a countenance full
of joy, he thanked them for having told him the truth without disguise. It
was his greatest happiness to obey others; although the founder of his
Order, he relinquished its government, and said that he would obey as
cheerfully the youngest as the oldest in the Order. Holy Church, the best
judge of virtue, calls him by excellence the humble St. Francis, and it is
said that as a recompense for his profound humility God has given him one
of the highest places left vacant by the rebel angels, whose pride was the
cause of their fall.

Prayer.

O Sweet Saviour! it was in Thy school that St. Francis studied that
profound humility, and advanced therein with giant strides; and I, who am
covered with sins, am unable to subdue the pride of my heart. Let Thy holy
grace aid me to humble myself as I ought, and in order that the spirit of
pride may never more lead me into error, grant that, like St. Francis, I
may embrace the humiliations of Thy Cross. O glorious St. Francis! may I
ever strive to imitate thy humility: may I love, like thee, to see myself
trampled upon by all men, and may I never forget that my true happiness
consists, not in the honours of this world, but in suffering humiliations,
and rejoicing in them for the love of God. Amen.

Three Our Fathers, Hail Marys, and Glory be, &c.

Second Day.
On the Poverty of St. Francis.

It may truly be said that evangelical poverty was St. Francis' favourite
virtue. His father having pressed him to renounce his patrimony, he gave
up all, even his last article of clothing, and from that moment chose
poverty as his inheritance. It appeared to him an inestimable gift, which
he begged from God with many prayers and tears. When in Rome, he besought
the holy Apostles Peter and Paul to obtain it for him; and they, delighted
with so sublime a prayer, assured him that God accorded him the favour he
asked. He called poverty his sister, his mother, his spouse, his queen; he
spoke of it with profound emotion; he lamented that men had so completely
neglected it, and did all in his power that they should prize and love it.
If he saw any one who appeared poorer and more destitute than himself, he
made it the subject of holy self-reproach, and excited in his heart a
great jealousy lest he should be surpassed in love for his dear poverty.
In a word, no one ever desired riches so ardently as he desired to be poor
for the love of God.

Prayer.

O my Jesus! who can help being moved in considering the poverty which
Thou and Thy Holy Mother didst endure for our sake? It was on this St.
Francis frequently meditated with tears; and no sooner had he discovered
the excellence of a virtue so esteemed and loved by Thee, than he embraced
it with ardour, and could find no repose but in its possession. O Lord,
grant that, moved by such powerful examples, I may strip myself of all
inordinate affection for the things of this world, that so I may be able
truly to say, with my Seraphic Father: My God and my all.

O Holy Father! obtain for me but one drop of that sweetness thou didst
find in the practice of poverty; that so I may no longer regard it with
the eyes of a foolish world, but with thine, and may be attracted by the
charms it acquired from the poor and lowly lives of Jesus and Mary. Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Third Day.
On the Mortification of St. Francis.

One of the blessed companions of our Holy Father said, that had St.
Francis had the strong constitution and robust health he desired, no one
would have led so mortified and penitent a life as he would. From the
very outset of his religious career he observed so many Lents each year,
that but a short interval elapsed between each, so that his fast was
almost perpetual. His choicest dish consisted of a few herbs seasoned
with ashes or cold water. Whenever it happened that, through sickness, he
was compelled to make use of flesh meat, he took care to do penance for
this indulgence as soon as he recovered, by redoubling his austerities.
The hair-shirt, the discipline, long vigils and tears, were his delights.
He vanquished temptation by rolling himself in the winter snow, on
thorns, or on red-hot cinders; he sought constantly new ways of
mortifying his flesh, and had so accustomed his body to suffering, that
it seemed to be perfectly submitted to the spirit; to such an extent,
that when the spirit desired to practise some act of virtue, the body,
so far from rebelling, appeared on the contrary to co-operate willingly
in its performance.

Prayer.

O my Dear Redeemer! what a difference between the conduct of St. Francis
and mine! He led so pure a life, and treated himself so severely; and I,
after so many sins, only seek to indulge myself, and the very name of
penance fills me with fear. O my God! may his example arouse me from this
dangerous repose, and excite me to suffer a thousand deaths rather than
offend Thee by satisfying my sensuality; and this is the resolution I
form by the help of thy holy grace.

O illustrious Penitent! at thy last hour thou didst ask pardon of thy
body for having treated it with such rigour; do not permit that, through
a false tenderness, I may neglect to mortify mine during this life, lest
at the hour of death I regret in vain the cares I have bestowed on it.
Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Fourth Day.
On St. Francis' Patience.

When St. Francis beheld for the first time the vision of Jesus crucified,
he heard Him say these words: "If thou wilt come after me, deny thyself,
take up thy cross and follow me." No sooner had he heard this, than he
embraced the cross with heroic patience, and throughout the whole of the
perfect life he undertook to lead, he had many occasions of practising it
in the highest degree. His austerities having rendered him pale and
languid, people thought he had lost the use of his reason, and made him
an object of mockery; they assailed him with cries and insults, and even
went so far as to cast mud and stones at him; but he passed along as
though he did not perceive it. He supported with the same equanimity the
ill-treatment of his father, of robbers, of the Saracens, and even of the
demons. He was afflicted with many severe pains and ailments; and,
particularly during the latter years of his life, he suffered so much
that he appeared almost like a skeleton. Nevertheless he looked upon
these sufferings as so many gifts of God.

Prayer.

O my Saviour! when will I also find as much joy in pains and sufferings,
as in sweetness and consolations? Ah! I have only to think of Thy bitter
passion in order to do so. Then I will adore and love in all things Thy
Divine Will. I ask it of Thee with the profoundest humility of heart; I
am confident Thou wilt grant it to me, and from this moment I thank Thee
for all the afflictions it may please Thee to send me. Alas! wert Thou to
send me a thousand times greater ones, they would never be in proportion
to my sins.

O Glorious St. Francis! may thy patience sustain me, and convince me of
that great truth thou didst love to teach; that the perfect happiness and
true glory of those who serve God consist in suffering willingly for His
love. Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Fifth Day.
On St. Francis' love of God.

St. Francis was so inflamed with divine love, that he appeared like a
Seraph, and received the title of Seraphic. In his youth he formed the
sublime resolution of never refusing anything asked of him for the love
of God. It was this love which stripped him of all he possessed; it was
this love which carried him three times into the midst of the infidels,
that he might shed his blood for the glory of God; this love was the
principle of all his labours for the salvation of his neighbour; for he
believed it impossible to be loved by God, unless he did all in his power
to save the souls purchased with the Blood of Jesus Christ. At the very
mention of the love of God, St. Francis burned with a celestial fire, and
this was often the cause of his extraordinary languors and ecstasies. In
fine, as St. Francis of Sales remarked, Our Holy Father's death was
caused by the ardour of divine love.

Prayer.

O my God! it was not without reason that St. Bonaventure compared St.
Francis to a burning coal, all consumed with the fire of Thy love. What a
source of shame for me, that while creatures served our holy Father as
steps by which to ascend to Thee, they are for me a constant occasion of
offending Thy Infinite Majesty, and of neglecting Thy service! Pardon me,
O Lord! and grant me but a spark of that holy fire which consumed Thy
servant, that, like him, I may no longer have any desire but to please
Thee, and consecrate myself wholly to the glory of Thy holy name. O
Seraph of love, let thy example draw all my inclinations towards that
abyss of goodness, that so henceforward I may find no pain but in what
offends God, no consolation but in labouring and suffering for His love.
Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Sixth Day.
St. Francis' Charity for his Neighbour.

Had any one been able to penetrate into the heart of St. Francis, he
would have discovered therein a wonderful combination of gentleness and
love for his neighbour. In his youth he stripped himself of his garments
to clothe a poor soldier, and on other occasions he divided them that he
might give part to the needy. To serve those suffering from leprosy was
one of his favourite occupations; in the sufferings of others he beheld
those which Jesus Christ endured for our sake, and whenever he cast his
eyes upon a poor person, his heart was moved to compassion. But the
salvation of souls was the principal object of his charity; he desired,
were it possible, to convert and sanctify all the nations of the earth;
for that end he never ceased to labour and pray; not content with
employing his disciples in the work, he laboured in person for the
salvation of souls, traversing provinces and kingdoms; and the vineyard
of the Lord, watered with his sweat, produced wonderful fruits of grace,
of which not the least was the Third Order.

Prayer.

O my Jesus! how far am I from imitating those bright examples of
Christian charity? How often does not self-love make me forget my duties
towards others! O Lord, I sincerely repent of my hard-heartedness;
henceforward I will look upon each of my brethren as a second self; and
as sin is the greatest misfortune which can befall them, I beseech Thee,
O my God, to afflict me as Thou pleasest, but deign to preserve them from
so great an evil.

And do Thou, O holy and compassionate Father, obtain for me a heart like
thine, with which I may consider my neighbour, not according to the
dictates of self-love, but according to those of that tender charity
which binds me to him in the profession of the same Faith, and in the
imitation of the life, and the practice of the teachings of our Divine
Lord. Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Seventh Day.
St. Francis' devotion to the Mysteries of Our Lord's Life.

St. Francis prepared for the principal feasts by observing long Lents,
during which he not only fasted, but also passed his time in fervent
meditations and other exercises of solid piety. He had a great devotion
to our Lord's Nativity, and celebrated it in so tender and touching a
manner, that all were moved to an extraordinary degree. In order to
recompense his servant, our Lord deigned to repose under the form of an
infant, in the crib St. Francis had prepared. The holy patriarch shed
bitter tears when he thought of the passion of Our Saviour; it was at the
same time his model, his book, and the ordinary subject of his
discourses. It was impossible to see him communicate without being
penetrated by devotion, and the ineffable sweetness he experienced
therein often raised him into ecstasy.

Prayer.

O Sweet Jesus! Thy mysteries were a heavenly mine, from which St. Francis
drew forth immense treasures of sanctity; and I think I honour them very
much when I perform languidly some exterior exercises of piety, with a
mind filled with a thousand vanities. Ah! teach me Thyself, O Lord, what
Thou wilt I should do. I adore and love Thee in Thy life, and passion,
and death; deign to show me Thy ways and my duties.

And thou St. Francis, perfect model of devotion, aid me to praise God,
not only with my lips, but also with my heart, by my actions and my
whole life. Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Eighth Day.
On the Sacred Stigmata of St. Francis.

The life of St. Francis had many points of resemblance to that of Our
Divine Lord; but the impression of the Wounds of Jesus on the body of His
holy servant was the perfection and seal of that divine conformity. Our
Saviour appeared to him under the form of a bright Seraph crucified; and
after having wounded his heart with love by the contemplation of his
ravishing beauty, and by mysterious words of ineffable sweetness, he
wounded the very body of His servant; imprinting in his hands and feet
and side a lifelike image of the wounds He had received for the salvation
of the world. This was accompanied by an excessive anguish, which the
holy patriarch endured during the two years it pleased God to spare him
to manifest to the eyes of men the precious marks of our redemption.

Prayer.

Who, O Lord, can praise Thee worthily for so admirable a work? Thou
didst desire that the wounds of Thy servant, recalling Thine own, should
excite us to render Thee love for the inestimable benefit of Thy bitter
passion: be Thou for ever blessed for this mark of Thy Fatherly care!
Deign, O God, to accomplish the desire with which the sight of those holy
wounds inspire me; make me die to the world and to myself, that I may
live solely for Thee.

O Blessed Father! increase, by the ardours of thy love, the sentiments
which thy holy wounds arouse within me; that while saluting them with
profound respect, I may understand the words they whisper to me: "Love
tenderly that God, who by an excess of goodness has deigned to suffer
and die for the love of thee."

Three Our Fathers, &c., as above.

Ninth Day.
On the happy death of St. Francis.

The death of St. Francis was one of the most touching spectacles the
world has ever seen. At his last hour, remembering the nakedness of our
Saviour on the cross, he stretched himself naked on the earth in order to
imitate Him. The Superior offered him a habit, saying that he lent it to
him as an alms; and St. Francis, rejoicing to be faithful unto death to
his dear poverty, received it with thanksgiving. He asked them to read
aloud the history of the passion according to St. John; then he recited
the 141st Psalm, and while reciting the last verse: "Lead my soul out of
prison, that I may praise thy name: the just wait for me until thou
reward me," he rendered his soul sweetly to God.

That holy soul was seen to mount to eternal glory, like a lovely star
ascending the heavens; his body remained on earth, no longer thin and
worn, but youthful and marvellously white, made beautiful by the
stigmata received from his Lord.

Prayer.

O my Jesus! how precious is the death of Thy Saints! St. Francis, at its
approach, expressed by fervent thanksgivings the excess of his joy, and
called upon his Brothers to aid him in singing Thy praises. Grant me the
grace to lead a life similar in some degree to his, that, like him, I may
die the death of the Saints. O Holy Father, ask this favour for thy
unworthy child. Make me humble and mortified, patient and charitable; and
when my last hour comes, do thou stand near and aid me, and lead me to
the feet of thy Lord and mine. Amen.

Three Our Fathers, &c.

================================================================================

EDITORIAL NOTE ON OMITTED MATERIAL: The Manual's surrounding pages (before
p. 61 and after p. 71) contain material specific to the Arch-Confraternity
of the Cord — indulgence grants attached to confraternity membership, the
Rosary of the Seven Joys of the Blessed Virgin, and similar nineteenth-
century Roman Catholic devotional-society material. None of that is part
of the Novena itself (pp. 61-71) and none of it is reproduced here or in
the app's seed data — Phoebe presents the Novena as a devotion in its own
right, not as a confraternity-membership document.
