"Novena of the Immaculate Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel," from The Carmelite
Manual, compiled by John Spratt, Dublin, 1846, pp. 449-476. Public domain
(Internet Archive identifier: TheCarmeliteManual, Public Domain Mark 1.0).

Transcribed directly from page images of the 1846 edition. Original spelling,
capitalization, and punctuation preserved as printed, including the book's
own cross-references ("Hymn, as in page 410," etc. — that hymn is printed
elsewhere in the Manual and is not reproduced here, since only pages 449-476
were transcribed). This is a historical novena in honour of the Blessed
Virgin Mary under her title of Mount Carmel — not a composition of any of
the saints quoted within it.

--- p. 449 ---

NOVENA
OF THE IMMACULATE VIRGIN MARY OF
MOUNT CARMEL.

This pious devotion commences in the Carmelite Church of Dublin, on the 16th
of July; a day set apart for the celebration of the solemn feast of the
blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, and continues nine days, that is, until
the 25th of July.

The person performing it should be free, at least, from the stain of mortal
sin; and, if convenient, should confess and receive on the first day. Though
the time appointed for performing this Novena, be from the 16th to the 24th,
yet it may be recited by private families at any other time of the year.

N.B.—The novena of the blessed Virgin Mary is practised with great
solemnity in all the Carmelite churches on the Continent, and antecedent to
the pretended Reformation, was well known to the Catholics of England and
Ireland.

FIRST DAY.

Come, O Holy Ghost, replenish the hearts of thy faithful, and enkindle in
them the fire of thy divine love.

V. Send forth thy Spirit and they shall be created.
R. And thou shalt renew the face of the earth.

--- p. 450 ---

PRAYER.

Prostrate before the throne of thy eternal Majesty, in humble adoration of
thy infinite perfections, and conscious of our great unworthiness to appear
in thy divine presence, O Lord God, our Creator and most merciful Saviour,
before we presume to perform this novena, which we offer to thee in honour
of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, and in grateful acknowledgment of
the innumerable graces and blessings thou hast conferred on us through her
merits and intercession; particularly for thy having given her to us for our
mother and special protectress, we most humbly confess all our grievous and
numberless sins; detest and renounce them from the bottom of our hearts; and
cry to thee for mercy and pardon.

FIRST MEDITATION.

Since the church teaches us so frequently to repeat the words "Pray for
us," when we recite the litany of the blessed virgin, before we meditate on
the various titles under which we invoke her, let us consider the efficacy
of her prayers with God. Oh! thrice happy is that soul for whom Mary prays.
Our Lord Jesus delights to be petitioned by his most beloved mother, and to
grant whatever she asks of him. "Ask, my dear mother," says our Lord,
"whatever thou wilt from me; for thou knowest that no petition of thine can
be in vain: thou didst deny me nothing on earth, nor will I deny thee
anything in heaven."

--- p. 451 ---

"As soon as Mary's petition is heard by her divine Son," says St. Bernard,
"that instant it is granted." Let us, then, if we be solicitous about our
eternal salvation, frequently beseech this heavenly queen to pray for us.

PRAYER.

Inspired with confidence on account of your unspeakable tenderness in
giving us the holy scapular, as a livery whereby we might be distinguished
as your servants, we beg of you, O great queen of heaven, to offer your most
powerful prayers for us at the throne of mercy; and obtain that we may never
disgrace your holy habit by the irregularity of our lives, but that we may
honour it by the purity of our morals.

Holy Mary, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.

SECOND MEDITATION.
HOLY MARY.

The name of Mary is so sweet and so salutary, that St. Epiphanius concludes
that it must have been given her, not by her parents, but from above. After
the most adorable name of Jesus, there is none so consoling or so powerful
as that of Mary. "O Mary!" exclaims St. Bernard, "no one can pronounce thy
name without feeling his heart inflamed with love and reverence for thee."
"O Mary!" cries another saint, "what must thou thyself be, when thy very
name is so sweet and amiable!" And St. Bonaventure assures us,

--- p. 452 ---

that this holy name cannot be invoked without great advantage to the
person who pronounces it, particularly in the time of temptation, when the
infernal powers are to be overcome.

PRAYER.

O holy queen of Carmel, had I invoked your holy name in the hour of
temptation, I should not have so often fallen, and offended my God; but
since I have the happiness, however unworthily, of being now enrolled
amongst those whom you have been pleased to honour with the fond title of
your children, I shall, henceforward, constantly, and with confidence,
particularly when in any spiritual danger, call on you to pray for me.

Holy Mary, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.

THIRD MEDITATION.
HOLY MOTHER OF GOD.

If the prayers of the saints prevail so much with God, what must be the
power and efficacy of those of Mary? Those are the petitions of servants,
but these are the prayers of a mother. Hence St. Antoninus did not hesitate
to say, that the prayers of Mary are by our Lord Jesus Christ regarded as
commands; and he concludes it is impossible that any request of the mother
of God in our behalf, should not be granted. Let us, then, following the
advice of St. Bernard, ask no grace or favour from heaven, unless through
the intercession of Mary, for she is the mother of God and cannot be
refused.

--- p. 453 ---

PRAYER.

O Mary, mother of God, pray for us! Yes, let your powerful prayers be
continually offered up for us! Not content with calling us your children,
you were pleased to distinguish us by the privileged title of your "most
beloved children." Cease not, then, O most pious Virgin Mary, to pray that
we may also be distinguished by our ardent love for your divine Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ, and do not forsake us until you see us in possession of
eternal happiness in the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

Holy mother of God, pray for us.
Holy virgin of virgins, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, as in page 410.

V. Pray for us, O holy mother of God.
R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

PRAYER.

O God, who hast adorned the society of Carmelites with the glorious title
of the "Order of thy blessed and ever virgin mother, Mary," mercifully grant
that we, who this day celebrate with solemnity her commemoration, may,
assisted by her protection, arrive at eternal happiness; who liveth and
reigneth with the Father in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world
without end. Amen.

--- p. 454 ---

SECOND DAY.

Come, Holy Ghost, &c., as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
MOTHER OF DIVINE GRACE.

Mary, the mother of God, is called by St. Anselm the "mother of all
graces." And St. Bernardine of Sienna writes, that "all the divine gifts and
graces are dispensed through the hands of Mary; to whom Mary wills; when
Mary pleases, and in the manner that Mary wishes." "With me," says our
blessed lady, "are riches, that I may enrich them that love me." That is,
the Lord hath placed in my hands all the treasures of his graces, in order
that I may bestow them on those who love me.

PRAYER.

It is true, then, chaste mother of the Word incarnate, that if I love you,
I shall no longer be poor as I am. If every creature be bound to love you,
am not I still more so, in gratitude for the many signal proofs you have
given Carmelites of your love and tenderness? Yes, after God, I love you
above all things. Obtain for me that this my love towards you may daily
increase, and lead me to a perfect love of God. St. Bernard tells me, that
"whomsoever you wish shall be saved." You have declared that your scapular
should be to us a sign of salvation; save me, then, O holy virgin, save me
from hell, and save me from sin, which ought to be more dreaded than hell.

--- p. 455 ---

Mother of divine grace, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.

SECOND MEDITATION.
MOST PURE MOTHER.

This virgin mother, who is all pure and spotless, renders all her devout
servants pure and chaste. "Mary," says St. Ambrose, "even whilst on earth,
was so full of grace that she inspired those who beheld her with a love for
the virtue of purity." As the lily among thorns, so was Mary among the other
virgins; "for," says St. Dionysius the Carthusian, "other virgins may be
pure themselves, but Mary infused into the souls of her beholders pure and
holy affections." Nay, we are told that St. Thomas of Aquin was wont to say,
that to look upon an image of this chaste dove with devotion, was sufficient
to extinguish the fire of concupiscence; and the venerable father John Avila
assures us, that many persons have been preserved pure, amidst most violent
temptations, by their devotion to the pure and spotless virgin mother of
God.

PRAYER.

Yes, most pure mother, I know that your very name is sufficient to put to
flight the demon of impurity; surely you will not permit your children, who
are under your special protection and wear your livery, ever to yield to
such abominable temptations. No: when assailed may we ever

--- p. 456 ---

invoke your assistance, until delivered from danger by your prayers and
protection.

Most pure mother, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.

THIRD MEDITATION.
MOTHER INVIOLATE.

Mary was that inviolate soul, addressing whom our Lord in the canticle
(iv. 7.) says, "Thou art all fair, my beloved, and there is not a spot in
thee." It was on account of her being free from every stain of sin, that she
was appointed the peace-maker between God and man. Hence she says, (Cant.
viii.) "I am become in his presence as one finding peace." "If," says St.
Gregory, "a rebel subject appeared as an intercessor for his accomplices
before his offended king, instead of appeasing, he would provoke the
monarch's anger and indignation; hence Mary, who was destined to be our
mediatrix, was preserved from a participation in the crime of Adam, and free
from every stain of sin."

PRAYER.

O holy and inviolate virgin! pure and spotless dove, so dear to God, let
not the sight of my sins and corruption cause you to turn away from me with
disgust, but rather to compassionate and pity my misery. Our God, who loves
you so much, can deny you nothing; nor can you, O merciful

--- p. 457 ---

virgin of Carmel, refuse to assist your children, who put their trust in
your intercession; obtain for me a horror of sin, and a true spirit of
penance and mortification.

Mother inviolate, pray for us.
Undefiled mother, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, as in p. 410, prayer, p. 453.

THIRD DAY.

Come, O Holy Ghost, &c., as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
AMIABLE MOTHER.

Mary appeared so amiable in the eyes of God, that the Holy Spirit,
addressing her in the Canticle, says, "How beautiful art thou, my
beloved." And again, (chap. vi.) our Lord declares her to be "his only
dove—his only perfect one." It is certain that God loves the blessed virgin
more than he does all the other saints, because her love for God exceeds the
united love of all his other creatures, both angels and men.

PRAYER.

O beauteous flower of Carmel! lovely spouse of the Spirit of God! since
your graces and beauty have merited the admiration of your Creator, take
also my poor heart; it loves you, O amiable mother of God: teach it ardently
to love your Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Amiable mother, pray for us.
Admirable mother, pray for us.
Mother of our Creator, pray for us.

--- p. 458 ---

Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.

SECOND MEDITATION.
MOTHER OF OUR SAVIOUR.

Mary not only brought forth to the world a Saviour, but co-operated so far
in the great work of our redemption that she is called by St. Bonaventure,
"The mediatrix of our salvation," and St. John Damascene says, she in a
certain manner, saved the world. First, because she gave her consent to the
incarnation of the Son of God, by which St. Bernardine declares she procured
our salvation; and secondly, because she consented to the death of her son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, for love of us.

PRAYER.

Queen of Carmel! mother of charity! who for love of us sinners, and for
our salvation, did resign your adorable Son, Jesus, to the ignominious death
of the cross, in obedience to the will of his eternal Father, obtain for me,
that by frequently meditating on his passion and death, my heart may be
inflamed with his holy love. Amen.

Mother of our Saviour, pray for us.
Most prudent virgin, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father.
Hymn, p. 410, prayer, p. 453.

THIRD MEDITATION.
VIRGIN MOST VENERABLE.

Mary is the mother of our God, therefore she is worthy of the most
profound veneration from

--- p. 459 ---

all God's creatures. "O Lady!" exclaims St. Anselm, "nothing is equal to
you; for everything is either superior or inferior to you, and such is
every thing that is not God." St. Bernard says that "God alone can
comprehend the greatness and dignity of Mary, or how much she is worthy of
veneration." "She could not," says B. Albert the Great, "be more closely
united with God, unless she became God."

PRAYER.

You are truly worthy of my most profound veneration, O most venerable
virgin of Carmel, since the omnipotence of God could not exalt any creature
to a dignity more eminent than that to which you have been elevated; as
such, then, I love and reverence you with the most profound respect, and
Oh! that I could induce all mankind to love and honour you. Pray, I beseech
you, for the conversion of those blind mortals who offend our Lord Jesus by
their blasphemous disrespect for you, his most venerable mother.

Virgin most venerable, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, as in p. 410.

FOURTH DAY.

Come, O Holy Ghost, &c. as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
VIRGIN MOST RENOWNED.

The Catholic church sings, that "Mary is worthy of all praise," for all the
praise bestowed on

--- p. 460 ---

the blessed virgin redounds to the honour of God; hence St. Gregory assures
us that God accepts the praises conferred on Mary, as if offered to
himself. It is for this reason that this most blessed virgin promises heaven
to those who proclaim to others her virtues and prerogatives: "And they that
explain me shall have life everlasting." It is true that all cannot
pronounce eloquent eulogies and panegyric on the mother of God, but each
one can, when in familiar conversation with his companions or friends, speak
of her glories, and recommend devotion to the mother of God, who is so
eminently entitled to the praises of all generations.

PRAYER.

Mother of God, I should be unworthy to call myself a member of your
cherished order, which first built an oratory in your honour, and first sang
your praises on Carmel, did I not do all in my power to induce all mankind
to love, honour, and praise you. Yes this is my earnest and ardent desire;
assist me, glorious virgin, to accomplish it, and as I am your servant, do
not permit me to become a slave to sin.

Virgin most renowned, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.

SECOND MEDITATION.
VIRGIN MOST POWERFUL.

What power can be conceived, after Omnipotence, greater than that of the
mother of God?

--- p. 461 ---

"O holy Virgin!" exclaims St. Bernard, "ask, and all things are done."
And St. Peter Damian assures us that Mary is so powerful in heaven, that
when Mary approaches the throne of his divine Majesty, even in behalf of
the enemies of his divine Majesty (such as those in the state of mortal
sin,) she is not looked upon as a petitioner, but as one who may command;
for Jesus the Son of Mary, honours his virgin mother so much, that he will
deny her nothing.

PRAYER.

O most powerful virgin, Mary of Carmel, your prayers in behalf of us
sinners are omnipotent with God; you can, if you will, make me a saint: for
you are the mother of God. Will it, then, O merciful virgin; ask it of your
Son Jesus. I place my confidence in you; do not forsake me.

Virgin most powerful, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn, p. 410.

THIRD MEDITATION.
VIRGIN MOST MERCIFUL.

Mary is not only most powerful with God, but also full of mercy and
clemency towards those who have recourse to her by humble prayer. "She not
only can," says St. Bernard, "as mother of God, but also has the will to
assist and serve us; for she is our mother also. Let him," continues the
same saint, addressing the blessed virgin, "who ever recollects his having
had recourse to you in vain, cease to join in the praises

--- p. 462 ---

of your mercy." No, this clement mother cannot be acquainted with our
miseries without feeling for and assisting us.

PRAYER.

Turn, O gracious virgin of Carmel, your eyes of mercy, towards all the
miseries of my poor soul. I am nothing but sin, and merit no mercy from your
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, having so often abused his grace and mercy. He
will regard your prayers in my behalf. St. Bonaventure encourages me to
implore your intercession, when he tells me that you are offended with
those who do not solicit favours at your hands. Do then, I implore you,
most clement virgin, pray to our Lord for me; and obtain for me mercy and
pardon of my sins.

Virgin most merciful, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn, p. 410.

FIFTH DAY.

Come, O Holy Ghost, &c., as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
VIRGIN MOST FAITHFUL.

The church of Christ puts these words in the mouth of the blessed virgin
(Prov. viii.) "Blessed is the man who watcheth daily at my gates," in
prayer, like a mendicant at the door of the rich, waiting for relief. Oh!
were we faithful, like St. Simon Stock, in our devotions to this mother of
mercy, we should, like him, find her most faithful

--- p. 463 ---

in assisting us. Mary promises (and she is most faithful to her promises,)
that those who honour and serve her shall be preserved from sin, and shall
possess eternal life; and in the words of Ecclesiasticus, (chap. xxiv.)
invites all to come to her, and assures them that "in her is all grace of
the way and of the truth: all hope of life and of virtue."

PRAYER.

Holy mother of God, encouraged by your invitations and gracious promises,
to which you are always most faithful, I fly to you, and most willingly
place in your hands all my hopes of grace and glory. You have been always
the most faithful protectress of your order. Pray, mother of Carmel, that we
may be faithful observers of the law of God to the end of our lives. Amen.

Virgin most faithful, pray for us.
Mirror of justice, pray for us.
Seat of wisdom, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn, p. 410.

SECOND MEDITATION.
CAUSE OF OUR JOY.

Mary was the morning star that announced the rising of the Sun of Justice,
Christ Jesus, our Redeemer, who was to dispel the darkness of death that
had overhung the earth for four thousand years. Her birth, after that long
and saddening gloom of sin, brought joy and gladness to

--- p. 464 ---

the world. With reason, then, does the church of God, on the feast of her
nativity, sing, "Thy birth, O virgin mother of God, announced joy to the
entire world." Mary is not only the cause, but also the completion of our
joy; for, according to St. Bernard, our Lord has placed the whole price of
his passion in the hands of his divine mother, in order that our ransom
should be paid through her.

PRAYER.

Mother of Carmel, cause of our joy, and safe anchor of our hope! I
rejoice, that through you we have received the world's redemption. I
rejoice that you are so exalted, so powerful, and so dear to God; and oh!
how happy do I feel in being permitted to call you mother of the Carmelites.
You are my joy and my consolation: protect and pray for me.

Cause of our joy, pray for us.
Spiritual vessel, pray for us.
Honourable vessel, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn, p. 410.

THIRD MEDITATION.
VESSEL OF SINGULAR DEVOTION.

Devotion, according to St. Thomas, consists in the prompt resignation or
obedience of our will to the holy will of God. This virtue was the greatest
of Mary's perfections, and our divine Redeemer insinuated as much, when in
answer to the woman who exclaimed, "Blessed is the womb

--- p. 465 ---

that bore thee," he said, "Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word
of God and keep it." "By which words," says Venerable Bede, "our Lord
declares that Mary was more blessed, on account of the uniformity of her
will to the will of God, than in being his mother." The holy and adorable
will of God, was the only object, the only consolation of the heart of
Mary. Hence, in the Canticle, she sings, "And my spirit hath rejoiced in
God my Saviour."

PRAYER.

Mary, vessel of singular devotion, you have declared that your holy
scapular should be the bond of peace and union, between you and your
Carmelites; but how can we pretend to this holy union with you, unless our
will, like yours, be united to the holy will of God, in which alone is
eternal life. Pray for me, "O holy virgin of Carmel that my will may
henceforward be perfectly conformable in all things to the divine will."
Amen.

Vessel of singular devotion, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, as in p. 410; prayer, as in p. 453.

SIXTH DAY.

Come, O Holy Ghost, &c., as in p. 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
MYSTICAL ROSE.

The rose, on account of its colour resembling that of flaming fire, is an
emblem of the glowing

--- p. 466 ---

fire of charity; hence Mary, who is all charity, is called the mystical
rose, ever blooming, because ever burning with love for God, and for
miserable sinners. What a happiness for us to reflect, with St. Augustin,
that she is all charity, all solicitude for our eternal happiness. "Mary,"
says St. Bernard, "is the spouse whom our Lord in the Canticle calls 'the
enclosed garden of God,'" she being the mystical violet of humility, the
lily of purity, and the rose of charity.

PRAYER.

O mother of God, beauteous, ever-blooming rose, ornament of Carmel! you
entice all to approach you by the fragrant odours of your sanctity, and
vivify all by the glowing heat of your charity: draw off, I beseech you, my
affections from myself and from sin, and lead me to love my God and my
neighbour, for the love of God. Amen.

Mystical rose, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

SECOND MEDITATION.
TOWER OF DAVID.

Mary, in the sacred Canticle, is compared to the tower of David. "Thy
neck is as the tower of David, built with bulwarks." "Because," says St.
Bernardine, "of her eminent sanctity and sublime dignity, David's tower
being erected on the high and holy Mount Sion." Hence, it is declared in
Psalm lxxxvi., that the very foundations of her sanctity are exalted above
the highest

--- p. 467 ---

mountains. "Her foundations are in the holy mountains." Which, interpreted
by St. Gregory, signifies that the mother of God possesses a higher degree
of sanctity in the first moments of her existence, than the most eminent
saints did at the hour of their death.

PRAYER.

I rejoice, O supreme queen of angels and saints, at your exalted dignity
and super-eminent sanctity, and would be ready to lay down my life, if
necessary, to prevent your being deprived of one particle of your greatness
or glory. Oh! that I could, at the price of my blood, bring all the nations
of the earth to know, love, and honour you as you merit. Keep me under your
protection, and pray for me.

Tower of David, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

THIRD MEDITATION.
TOWER OF IVORY.

Mary is also compared to a tower of ivory (Cant. vii. 4,) because ivory
is remarkable both for the beautiful whiteness of its colour and for its
strength. Mary is spotless and amiable; because she is full of grace and
strong; because she crushed the serpent's head. The spiritual nourishment
which preserves in us the life of grace, descends through her from Christ
the head, to us, the members of his mystical body. For, as St. Antoninus
assures us, no grace has ever been

--- p. 468 ---

conferred upon man, since Mary became the mother of God, unless through
Mary.

PRAYER.

O holy virgin, because you are amiable and dear to God, you can obtain
for us whatever you ask; and because terrible to the infernal spirits and
assaults; pray, then, for, and defend those who glory in being under your
powerful protection.

Tower of ivory, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, p. 410; prayer, as in p. 453.

SEVENTH DAY.

Come, Holy Ghost, &c., as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
HOUSE OF GOLD.

Gold is the emblem of divine love; hence blessed Albert the Great, calls
Mary the "golden temple of charity," for, as St. Thomas remarks, as in the
temple of Solomon everything was covered with gold, so in the soul of Mary,
every virtue was perfected by her great love for God. Mary was that "house
of gold" which the eternal wisdom of the Father prepared for his habitation
on earth.

PRAYER.

Holy virgin of Carmel, golden temple of holy love! because you love our
God so ardently, you desire that he should be loved by all his creatures

--- p. 469 ---

you being the rich, the golden house of God, can relieve all my wants;
all, then, I want, all I ask, all I crave, is that my poor heart may be
enriched with the love of God. Remember, O mother of Carmel, that if I love
not, I abide in death; obtain for me, I beseech thee, the love of God, that
I may live in God. Amen.

House of gold, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

SECOND MEDITATION.
ARK OF THE COVENANT.

Mary is called the "ark, more spacious than that of Noah," for in it but
a few select persons, and a limited number of animals, were saved; but all,
both sinners and saints, find a place under the saving protection of Mary.
This was represented to St. Gertrude in a vision, wherein she saw all the
wild and fierce beasts of the creation approaching the queen of heaven, who
receiving them with mildness, and caressing them with blandishments,
rendered them tame. Thus our blessed lady (as she revealed to St. Bridget)
receives under her protection sinners, no matter how numerous or grievous
their crimes, provided they approach her with a sincere desire of returning
to God by true repentance; she will heal all the wounds of their souls, and
prove herself the mother of mercy by obtaining for them mercy and pardon.

PRAYER OF ST. AUGUSTIN.

Remember, O mother of mercy, that it is a thing unheard of, that you forsook a sinner who

--- p. 470 ---

had recourse to you for assistance; behold me, a miserable sinner, who
place all my hopes in your intercession, intercede for me and save me.

Ark of the covenant, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

THIRD MEDITATION.
GATE OF HEAVEN.

"No one can enter heaven," says St. Bonaventure, "unless through Mary."
Hence she is called the gate of Heaven. "My power," says our blessed lady,
(Mass of the B. V.) "is in the heavenly Jerusalem, obtaining what I ask, and
introducing whom I please." And St. Bonaventure says, that those who enjoy
the favour of Mary are recognised as citizens of paradise, and those who
wear her livery are written in the book of life.

PRAYER.

O mother of God, though unworthy, I have the happiness of wearing the
scapular you have given your favoured children, as a badge of your favour.
You are the gate of heaven; do not permit me, your devoted servant, to be
condemned to hell, there to curse you and God for eternity, but open heaven
to me by your prayers, that I may rejoice with you, O heavenly queen, and
sing the mercies of your Son, our Lord Jesus, for ever.

Gate of heaven, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, as in p. 410, prayer, as in p. 453.

--- p. 471 ---

EIGHTH DAY.

Come, Holy Ghost, &c., as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
MORNING STAR.

As the morning star announces the rising of the sun, so does devotion
towards the mother of God indicate that the fire of divine love already
blazes, or is about to be enkindled in the soul, by the rays of the sacred
heart of Jesus, who is the sun of justice. Mary is also called by the
church, "star of the sea," which, as explained by St. Thomas, means, that
as in a tempest the mariners are guided in their course by a star, so are
we directed by Mary in our voyage through the tempestuous ocean of this
world, to the port of eternal happiness. Hence St. Bernard exhorts us "ever
to gaze on this refulgent star, unless we wish to be wrecked in the storm
of temptation." And he adds, "If you follow Mary you cannot err; if she
protects you, you need not fear; if she be propitious, you will gain the
harbour of salvation.

PRAYER.

O most holy virgin of Carmel, storms of persecution have raged, billows of
temptation have dashed with fury, the gulf of despair has yawned, the black
and horrid tempest of sin, often, but in vain, menaced the destruction of
your cherished order; but guided by you, assisted by you, protected by you,
O glorious star of the sea, saints Albert, Angel, John of the Cross, Teresa,
Mary

--- p. 472 ---

Magdalene de Pazzi, and numberless others of your children, have braved
all dangers and arrived safe in the port of eternal felicity. Look down on
us, we beseech you, O holy virgin, who place all our confidence in you; and
obtain, that walking in their footsteps, we also may merit your protection
on earth, and enjoy you in heaven, and there with you, lose ourselves in the
love of our God, through the merits of Christ, for ever. Amen.

Morning star, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

SECOND MEDITATION.
HEALTH OF THE WEAK.

Mary is such a tender and compassionate mother to us, that she is not
only called the medicine, but the health of the weak, by saints Ephraim and
Simon Stock; to the latter of whom, when giving the holy scapular, she
declared it would be to all Carmelites a sign of health, which is to be
understood not merely of the body, but also, and more particularly, of the
soul. This corresponds with what our blessed lady says of herself, (Prov.
viii.) "He that shall find me, shall find life, and shall have salvation
from the Lord." Let us then have recourse to this merciful mother in all
our infirmities. St. Bernard assures us that though we be covered with
ulcers, she will not turn from us with disgust, but will heal all our
wounds, and effect our reconciliation with God.

--- p. 473 ---

PRAYER.

Mother of God, you are the health of the weak, pray then for me, I
beseech you, who am all weakness; assist and comfort me, when it shall
please God to send me any sickness or infirmity, and obtain that I may bear
it with patience and resignation. But, O mother of mercy, cure all the
maladies of my poor soul by your salutary prayers, and thus render me
pleasing in the sight of your divine Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Health of the weak, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

THIRD MEDITATION.
REFUGE OF SINNERS.

St. John Damascene says, that Mary is not only the mother of the innocent
and queen of saints, but also the refuge of sinners who implore her
protection. "Nor will she," says St. Anselm, "abandon them until she
succeeds in obtaining their pardon from her Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the Judge of the living and the dead."

PRAYER.

Mother of mercy, as you are the refuge of all sinners, you are my refuge.
You reject none that have recourse to you; do not, I beseech you, cast me
off, who am a most miserable sinner, and implore

--- p. 474 ---

your protection. I detest, renounce, and execrate sin from the bottom of
my heart, because by it I have offended my good God; and implore you,
mother of Carmel, by the love you have for your divine Son, and by all you
suffered at seeing him expire on Calvary, to obtain for me pardon of my
sins, and grace never more to offend him.

Refuge of sinners, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn, p. 410; prayer, p. 453.

NINTH DAY.

Come, Holy Ghost, &c., as in page 449.

FIRST MEDITATION.
COMFORTRESS OF THE AFFLICTED.

"O Mary!" exclaims St. Germanus, "after thy Son Jesus, who is there so
much interested for our happiness as you? or who affords us such
consolation in our affliction?" "No," says St. Bernard, "there is not among
the saints in heaven, one who feels so much compassion for our weakness and
misery as the mother of God." What comfort or consolation could anything
afford us, poor sinners, equal to that we derive from the reflection that
Mary is our refuge? Not only does this most merciful mother of God relieve
us when we call on her for assistance, but she anticipates all our wants.

PRAYER.

O most merciful mother, comfortress of the afflicted, behold me troubled
and afflicted at the sight of my past sins, and at the prospect of the
rigorous judgment I am to undergo after death. The only consolation I
desire or ask, is that I may not on that dreadful day be separated for ever

--- p. 475 ---

from you, O amiable mother, and from my God. Obtain for me pardon of my
sins, and assist me at the hour of death. Do you, O holy virgin, receive my
soul, and present it to your Son, our Lord Jesus; then he, for love of you,
will not condemn me.

Comfortress of the afflicted, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

SECOND MEDITATION.
HELP OF CHRISTIANS.

St. John Damascene calls the blessed virgin the help of Christians, ever
prompt and ready to free them from all dangers. "Mary," says St. Cosmas,
"is omnipotent in aiding us to overcome sin and hell." Hence St. Bernard
exclaims, "O Mary! thou art strong in battle, defending thy servants against
those infernal spirits who assail them. Thou art indeed terrible as an army
set in array."

PRAYER.

O mother of Carmel, had I sought your most powerful aid when assailed
with temptations, I should not have so often fallen a prey to the infernal
enemy. You are the strong "tower of David, built with bulwarks." From this
day you shall be my strength. When attacked by temptations I shall fly to
you, O holy virgin; do you but protect and help me, and I shall be
victorious.

Help of Christians, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.  Hymn & Prayer.

--- p. 476 ---

THIRD MEDITATION.
QUEEN OF MARTYRS.

Mary, standing at the foot of the cross on which her adorable Son Jesus,
covered with blood and full of wounds, expired for our salvation, suffered
more than all the martyrs that have since been put to death for the faith
of Christ. Hence she is styled "queen of martyrs." No other mother could
bear to stand and behold the tortures and agonies of a dear expiring child,
to whom she could afford no relief; but Mary stands near the cross, until
her dearest Jesus, her only Son, is put to death by the most cruel and
excruciating torments. Jesus agonises, and offers his life to his eternal
Father for our redemption; but whilst he dies she is in agony, and whilst he
suffers, the sword of sorrow pierces her maternal heart, and causes her more
pain than death can inflict.

PRAYER.

Queen of martyrs, I beseech you by the inexpressible grief and anguish
you suffered at the foot of the cross, to obtain for me sincere sorrow for
my sins, joined with an ardent love for my crucified Redeemer; and I
implore you by that sword of grief which pierced your sacred heart when
your Son Jesus, bowing down his head, expired, to intercede for me, that I
may now die to the world, and after this life live for ever in the
enjoyment of God. Amen.

Queen of martyrs, pray for us.
Mother and queen of Carmel, pray for us.
Our Father, &c.  Hail Mary, &c.
Glory be to the Father, &c.
Hymn p. 410; prayer, p. 453.

[Novena of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel ends here; the manual
continues directly with the Novena of Saint Teresa, transcribed separately
in novena_teresa_original.txt.]

--- EDITORIAL NOTES ---

1. "Hymn, as in page 410" / "Hymn & Prayer" (referring to pp. 410, 453) are
   cross-references within the original book to a hymn and closing prayer
   printed elsewhere in the Manual — NOT reproduced here, since only pages
   449-476 were transcribed. See note in the structured seed data.
2. Running heads and the "Digitized by Google" scan watermark are omitted
   as pagination/scan artifacts, not part of the devotional text.
